ADR 041: In-Place Store Migrations (#8646)
cosmos/cosmos-sdk: docs/architecture/adr-041-in-place-store-migrations.md

# ADR 041: In-Place Store Migrations

## Changelog

- 17.02.2021: Initial Draft

## Status

> Proposed

Reviewer: Shall we keep status Proposed? It's already implemented ;)

# ADR 041: In-Place Store Migrations

## Changelog

- 17.02.2021: Initial Draft

## Status

Proposed

## Abstract

This ADR introduces a mechanism to perform in-place store migrations during chain upgrades.

## Context

When a chain upgrade introduces state-breaking changes inside modules, the current procedure consists of exporting the whole state into a JSON file (via the `simd export` command), running migration scripts on the JSON file (`simd migrate` command), clearing the stores (`simd unsafe-reset-all` command), and starting a new chain with the migrated JSON file as new genesis (optionally with a custom initial block height). An example of such a procedure can be seen [in the Cosmos Hub 3->4 migration guide](https://github.com/cosmos/gaia/blob/v4.0.3/docs/migration/cosmoshub-3.md#upgrade-procedure).

> While [Cosmovisor](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/tree/v0.41.1/cosmovisor) aims to alleviate the difficulty of handling upgrades, this procedure is still cumbersome for multiple reasons:

Reviewer 2: Yeah I don't think cosmovisor uses json at all... unless someone changed it

> While [Cosmovisor](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/tree/v0.41.1/cosmovisor) aims to alleviate the difficulty of handling upgrades, this procedure is still cumbersome for multiple reasons:

Author: Ah right, my misunderstanding. Updated.

- The procedure takes time. It can take hours to run the `export` command, plus some additional hours to run `InitChain` on the fresh chain using the migrated JSON.
- The exported JSON file can be heavy (~100MB-1GB), making it difficult to view, edit and transfer, which in turn introduces additional work to solve these problems (such as [streaming genesis](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/issues/6936)).

## Decision

We propose a migration procedure based on modifying the KV store in-place. This procedure does not manipulate intermediary JSON files.

### Module `ConsensusVersion`

We introduce a new method on the `AppModule` interface:

```go
type AppModule interface {
    // --snip--
    ConsensusVersion() uint64
}
```

> This methods returns an `uint64` which serves as state-breaking versioning of the module. It MUST be incremented on each consensus-breaking change introduced by the module. To avoid potential errors with default values, the initial version of a module MUST be set to 1. In the SDK, version 1 corresponds to the modules in the v0.41 series.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This methods returns an `uint64` which serves as state-breaking version of the module. It MUST be incremented on each consensus-breaking change introduced by the module. To avoid potential errors with default values, the initial version of a module MUST be set to 1. In the SDK, version 1 corresponds to the modules in the v0.41 series.
```

> ### Module-Specific Migration Scripts

Author: no strong opinion. I renamed everything to `Migration Function`

> ### Module-Specific Migration Scripts

Reviewer: I think it's more clear to use _Function_ because we in the interface as well as in the examples we use functions.

For each consensus-breaking change introduced by the module, a migration script from ConsensusVersion `N` to version `N+1` MUST be registered in the `Configurator` using its newly-added `RegisterMigration` method. All modules receive a reference to the configurator in their `RegisterServices` method on `AppModule`, and this is where the migration scripts should be registered.

```go

> func (am AppModule) RegisterServices(cfg module.Configurator) {

Reviewer 3: Will a user be able to query data from before the migration? I'm guessing no, can this be mentioned? If the user cant query the old app.db should we keep it around or migrate to a new app.db?

Author: Added language to add a gRPC query on x/upgrade to query the VersionMap before the migration.

    // --snip--
    cfg.RegisterMigration(types.ModuleName, 1, func(ctx sdk.Context) error {
        // Perform in-place store migrations from ConsensusVersion 1 to 2.
    })
     cfg.RegisterMigration(types.ModuleName, 2, func(ctx sdk.Context) error {
        // Perform in-place store migrations from ConsensusVersion 2 to 3.

>     })

Reviewer 4: These migrations should follow the order right?, may be we should add a note here explicitely

Author: added, with the "should" wording. I think it's not strictly needed, the only thing needed is that all versions have their migration script.

    // etc.
}
```

For example, if the current ConsensusVersion of a module is `N` , then `N-1` migration scripts MUST be registered in the configurator.

In the SDK, the migration scripts are handled by each module's keeper, because the keeper holds the `sdk.StoreKey` used to perform in-place store migrations. A `MigrationKeeper` interface is implemented by each keeper:

```go
// MigrationKeeper is an interface that the keeper implements for handling
// in-place store migrations.

> type MigrationKeeper interface {

Reviewer 5: What's the purpose of `MigrationKeeper`? 

Does the logic of in-store migrations live in the anonymous func passed to `RegisterMigration`?

Reviewer 2: `MigrationKeeper` is really more of a best practice pattern here for how to implement those anonymous functions. Maybe create an example in those anonymous functions of calling the keeper methods @amaurym.

Author: As per Robert's suggestion (https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/pull/8504#discussion_r580339549), I updated to use a `Migrator` wrapper. lmk if that's clearer.

    // Migrate1 migrates the store from version 1 to 2.

>     Migrate1(ctx sdk.Context) error

Reviewer 6: IMHO embedding versioning in the name of the method stinks quite a bit...

Reviewer 6: I'm a bit wary of what could happen when there are, say 100 migrations, and each and every keeper will have to implement them all.....

Author: If the module bumps 100 times its consensus version, then the module must implement 100 migration functions.

In the latest commits, I updated so that these methods are not on the keeper anymore, but on a wrapper called `Migrator`. see https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/pull/8646#discussion_r587407732

    // ...Add more MigrateN scripts here.
}
```

Since migration scripts manipulate legacy code, they should live inside the `legacy/` folder of each module, and be called by the keeper's implementation of `MigrationKeeper`.

```go
func (keeper BankKeeper) Migrate1(ctx sdk.Context) error {
    return v042bank.MigrateStore(ctx, keeper.storeKey) // v042bank is package `x/bank/legacy/v042`.
}
```

Each module's migration scripts are specific to the module's store evolutions, and are not described in this ADR. An example of x/bank store key migrations following the introduction of ADR-028 length-prefixed addresses can be seen [here](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/ef8dabcf0f2ecaf26db1c6c6d5922e9399458bb3/x/bank/legacy/v042/store.go#L15).

### Tracking Module Versions in `x/upgrade`

We introduce a new prefix store in `x/upgrade`'s store. This store will track each module's current version, it can be modelized as a `map[string]uint64` of module name to module ConsensusVersion, and will be used when running the migrations (see next section for details). The key prefix used is `0x1`, and the key/value format is:

```

> 0x1 | {module_name_bytes} => LittleEndian(module_consensus_version)

Reviewer 7: This can be `0x2` as 0x1 already exist for DoneByte prefix

```

> We add a new parameter `ModuleManager` `x/upgrade`'s `NewKeeper` constructor, where ModuleManager is:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We add a new parameter `ModuleManager` to `x/upgrade`'s `NewKeeper` constructor, where ModuleManager is:
```

> We add a new parameter `ModuleManager` `x/upgrade`'s `NewKeeper` constructor, where ModuleManager is:

Reviewer: Why `ModuleManager` goes to the `x/upgrade.Keeper` constructor? I thought that the `x/upgrade.QueryServer`  will provide that functionality.  In that case we would simply query the `x/upgrade` and as for old versions.

Reviewer 2: To query the current versions from loaded modules

Author: I updated this a little bit: we unfortunately cannot add it in the constructor, because of a definition cycle in app.go: UpgradeKeeper needs ModuleManager which needs UpgradeKeeper. The way proposed here is to add a `SetVersionManager` setter on UpgradeKeeper.

```go
type ModuleManager interface {
    GetConsensusVersions() MigrationMap
}

// Map of module name => ConsensusVersion.
type MigrationMap map[string]uint64
```

When `InitChain` is run, the initial `ModuleManager.GetConsensusVersions()` value will be recorded to state. The UpgradeHandler signature needs to be updated to take a `MigrationMap`, as well as return an error:

```diff
- type UpgradeHandler func(ctx sdk.Context, plan Plan)
+ type UpgradeHandler func(ctx sdk.Context, plan Plan, migrationMap MigrationMap) error
```

> Applying an upgrade will fetch the `MigrationMap` from the `x/upgrade` store and pass it into the handler.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To apply an upgrade, we query the `MigrationMap` from the `x/upgrade` store and pass it into the handler:
```

```diff
func (k UpgradeKeeper) ApplyUpgrade(ctx sdk.Context, plan types.Plan) {
    // --snip--
-   handler(ctx, plan)
+   handler(ctx, plan, k.GetConsensusVersions()) // k.GetConsensusVersions() fetches the MigrationMap stored in state.
}
```

### Running Migrations

Once all the migration handlers are registered inside the configurator (which happens at startup), running migrations can happen by calling the `RunMigrations` method on `module.Manager`. This function will loop through all modules, and for each module:

> - Fetch the old ConsensusVersion of the module from its `migrationMap` argument (let's call it `M`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Get the old ConsensusVersion of the module from its `migrationMap` argument (let's call it `M`).
```

- Fetch the new ConsensusVersion of the module from the `ConsensusVersion()` method on `AppModule` (call it `N`).

> - If `N>M`, run all registered migrations for the module sequentially `M -> M+1 -> M+2...` until `N`.

Reviewer 2: Let's explain that if there is no old ConsensusVersion, no migration is run but the version is set in the new migration map. i.e. if we add module `foo` to our chain at version 5, no migrations will be run but 5 will be saved as the current version after migrations are run.

Author: Done. The `upgradeKeeper.SetCurrentConsensusVersions()` method to store the current version is run right after the upgrade handler.

btw, I removed saving ConsensusVersions during InitChain, because we don't need it.

If a required migration is missing (e.g. if it has not been registered in the `Configurator`), then the `RunMigrations` function will error.

In practice, the `RunMigrations` method should be called from inside an `UpgradeHandler`.

```go
app.UpgradeKeeper.SetUpgradeHandler("my-plan", func(ctx sdk.Context, plan upgradetypes.Plan, migrationMap MigrationMap) {
    err := app.mm.RunMigrations(ctx, migrationMap)
    if err != nil {
        panic(err)

>     }

Reviewer 2: We can return the error here

})
```

> Assuming a chain upgrades at block `N`, the procedure should run as follows:

Reviewer 4: To avoid the confusion, let's use different key
```suggestion
Assuming a chain upgrades at block `n`, the procedure should run as follows:
```

> - the old binary will halt in `BeginBlock` at block `N`. In its store, the ConsensusVersions of the old binary's modules are stored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- the old binary will halt in `BeginBlock` when starting block `N`. In its store, the ConsensusVersions of the old binary's modules are stored.
```

While modules MUST register their migration scripts when bumping ConsensusVersions, running those scripts using an upgrade handler is optional. An application may perfectly well decide to not call the `RunMigrations` inside its upgrade handler, and continue using the legacy JSON migration path.

### Positive

- Perform chain upgrades without manipulating JSON files.
- While no benchmark has been made yet, it is probable that in-place store migrations will take less time than JSON migrations. The main reason supporting this claim is that both the `simd export` command on the old binary and the `InitChain` function on the new binary will be skipped.

### Negative

- Module developers MUST correctly track consensus-breaking changes in their modules. If a consensus-breaking change is introduced in a module without its corresponding `ConsensusVersion()` bump, then the `RunMigrations` function won't detect the migration, and the chain upgrade might be unsuccessful. Documentation should clearly reflect this.

### Neutral

> - Currently, Cosmovisor only handles JSON migrations. Its code should be updated to support in-place store migrations too.

Reviewer 2: Is this true?? I didn't think Cosmovisor dealt with JSON migrations at all

Author: Yeah ok, removed.

}
```

For example, if the new ConsensusVersion of a module is `N` , then `N-1` migration functions MUST be registered in the configurator.

In the SDK, the migration functions are handled by each module's keeper, because the keeper holds the `sdk.StoreKey` used to perform in-place store migrations. To not overload the keeper, a `Migrator` wrapper is used by each module to handle the migration functions:

```go
// Migrator is a struct for handling in-place store migrations.
type Migrator struct {

> 	keeper BaseKeeper

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  BaseKeeper
```

- Get the old ConsensusVersion of the module from its `VersionMap` argument (let's call it `M`).
- Fetch the new ConsensusVersion of the module from the `ConsensusVersion()` method on `AppModule` (call it `N`).
- If `N>M`, run all registered migrations for the module sequentially `M -> M+1 -> M+2...` until `N`.
  - There is a special case where there is no ConsensusVersion for the module, as this means that the module has been newly added during the upgrade. In this case, no migration function is run, and the module's current ConsensusVersion is saved to `x/upgrade`'s store.

If a required migration is missing (e.g. if it has not been registered in the `Configurator`), then the `RunMigrations` function will error.

In practice, the `RunMigrations` method should be called from inside an `UpgradeHandler`.

```go
app.UpgradeKeeper.SetUpgradeHandler("my-plan", func(ctx sdk.Context, plan upgradetypes.Plan, versionMap VersionMap) error {

>     err := app.mm.RunMigrations(ctx, versionMap)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    return app.mm.RunMigrations(ctx, versionMap)
```

>     if err != nil {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

        return err

>     }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
